---
layout: ncrc_post
title: NCRC Keynote Speakers 2013
---

#### Walter Lewin

Walter Lewin taught the three core classes in physics at MIT for more than thirty years and made major discoveries in the area of X-ray astronomy. His physics lectures have been the subject of great acclaim, including a 60 Minutes feature, stories in the New York Times, Washington Post, Boston Globe, Newsweek and US News and World Report. They have also been top draws on YouTube and iTunes University. He was awarded three prizes for excellence in undergraduate teaching. He has published more than 450 scientific articles, and his honors and awards include the NASA Award for Exceptional Scientific Achievement, the Alexander von Humboldt Award, and a Guggenheim Fellowship. He became a corresponding member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and Fellow of the American Physical Society in 1993. He lives in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

#### Juan Enriquez

Mr. Enriquez is an experienced business leader, author, and academic who is recognized as one of the world’s leading authorities on the economic and political impacts of life sciences. He is a Managing Director in Excel Venture Management, a venture capital firm that invests in companies that apply transformative life science technologies to solve problems in healthcare and beyond.
He was the founding director of Harvard Business School’s Life Sciences Project. He then founded Biotechonomy LLC, a life sciences research and investment firm, where he remains as Chairman and CEO. In July of 2005, he co-founded Synthetic Genomics, Inc., a synthetic biology company focused on developing and commercializing genomic-driven solutions to address global energy, medicine, clean water, and food challenges.

He has been an active investor in early-stage private companies in the biotechnology and information sciences sectors. While at Harvard, he wrote various articles and case studies, won a McKinsey Prize, and published the best-selling work <em>As the Future Catches You</em>, an analysis of the impact of genomics on business and society. His most recent publication is an eBook co-authored with Dr. Steve Gullans, Homo Evolutis: A Short Tour of our New Species, which describes a world where humans increasingly shape their environment, themselves, and other species. Mr. Enriquez serves on a number of boards including Cabot Corporation, Synthetic Genomics, Catch. com, Shape Up, the Public Interfaces Steering Committee of the Division of Earth &amp; Life Sciences of the National Academy of Sciences, The Genetics Advisory Council of Harvard Medical School, The Chairman’s International Council of the America’s Society, and the Visiting Committee of Harvard’s David Rockefeller Center.
He earned a BA and MBA from Harvard, with Honors.

#### Jeffrey Sachs

Jeffrey D. Sachs is a world-renowned professor of economics, leader in sustainable development, senior UN advisor, bestselling author, and syndicated columnist whose monthly newspaper columns appear in more than 80 countries. He has twice been named among Time Magazine’s 100 most influential world leaders. He was called by the New York Times, “probably the most important economist in the world,” and by Time Magazine “the world’s best known economist.” A recent survey by The Economist Magazine ranked Professor Sachs as among the world’s three most influential living economists of the past decade.
Professor Sachs serves as the Director of The Earth Institute, Quetelet Professor of Sustainable Development, and Professor of Health Policy and Management at Columbia University. He is Special Advisor to United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki- moon on the Millennium Development Goals, having held the same position under former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan. He is co-founder and Chief Strategist of Millennium Promise Alliance, and is director of the Millennium Villages Project.

#### Steven Pinker

Steven Pinker is an experimental psychologist and one of the world’s foremost writers on language, mind, and human nature. Currently Harvard College Professor and Johnston Family Professor of Psychology at Harvard University, Pinker has also taught at Stanford and MIT. His research on visual cognition and the psychology of language has won prizes from the National Academy of Sciences, the Royal Institution of Great Britain, the Cognitive Neuroscience Society, and the American Psychological Association. He has also received seven honorary doctorates, several teaching awards at MIT and Harvard, and numerous prizes for his books The Language Instinct, How the Mind Works, and The Blank Slate. He is Chair of the Usage Panel of the American Heritage Dictionary, and often writes for The New York Times, Time, and The New Republic. He has been named Humanist of the Year, Prospect magazine’s “The World’s Top 100 Public Intellectuals,” Foreign Policy’s “100 Global Thinkers,” and Time magazine’s “The 100 Most Influential People in the World Today.”

#### Robert Lue

Robert A. Lue, Ph.D., is Professor of the Practice of Molecular and Cellular Biology at Harvard University, where he is the director of Life Sciences Education. His research focuses on defining and assessing how large research universities such
as Harvard can more effectively foster new generations of scientists as well as science-literate citizens. Undergraduate education in the life sciences at Harvard has undergone a dramatic transformation in recent years. Life sciences education now encompasses collaboration between seven departments: Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Human Evolutionary Biology, Molecular and Cellular Biology, Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Psychology, Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, and Biomedical Engineering in the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. Noteworthy results of this collaboration include a novel, interdisciplinary set of foundation courses and a coordinated cluster of undergraduate concentrations that allows students to develop their interests in coherent areas of inquiry within the life sciences.
