---
layout: ncrc_post
title: NCRC 2015 Plenary Speakers
---

Plenary presentations are short fifteen-minute presentations by undergraduates that will occur on Thursday, January 22nd, 2015 at two plenary sessions. Our plenary speakers were picked from a highly competitive pool of high-level undergraduates.

<h2>2015 Plenary Speakers</h2>


<h3>Session I</h3>

<b>Bliss Chang, Biochemistry, University of Alabama, Class of 2015
Structural Basis for Fas-mediated Apoptosis</b>

The extrinsic apoptotic pathway is initiated by cell surface death receptors such as Fas. Engagement of Fas by Fas Ligand triggers a conformational change that allows Fas to interact with adaptor protein Fas-associated death domain (FADD) via the cytoplasmic Death Domain, which recruits downstream signaling proteins to form the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC). Previous studies have shown that calmodulin (CaM) is recruited into the DISC in cholangiocarcinoma cells, suggesting a novel role of CaM in Fas-mediated signaling. CaM antagonists induce apoptosis through a Fas-related mechanism in cholangiocarcinoma and other cancer cell lines possibly by inhibiting Fas-CaM interactions. The structural determinants of Fas-CaM interaction and the underlying molecular mechanisms of inhibition, however, are unknown. We employ NMR, biochemical, and biophysical techniques to elucidate these mechanisms. We have shown that CaM binds to the death domain of Fas (FasDD) with a novel 2:1 CaM:FasDD stoichiometry. The interactions between FasDD and CaM are endothermic and entropically driven, suggesting that hydrophobic contacts are critical for binding. Proteolytic digestion and NMR experiments facilitated the identification of the two minimal binding domains of Fas involved in CaM binding. Characterization of both peptides revealed the CaM-FasDD binding interface, including binding affinity, mode of binding, and thermodynamic properties. We provide the first structural evidence for Fas-CaM interactions and provide new insight into the molecular basis for a novel role of CaM in regulating Fas-mediated apoptosis. We believe these discoveries will facilitate the discovery of effective yet minimally toxic therapies for debilitating diseases such as cholangiocarcinoma.

<b>Timothy Loh, Social Anthropology, Georgetown University, Class of 2015
The Deaf Leading the Deaf (and the Deaf-Blind): An Ethnographic Account of Deaf Education at the Holy Land Institute for Deaf and Deaf-Blind Children, Jordan</b>

This research paper explores the cultural construction of deafness and of deaf education at the Holy Land Institute for Deaf and Deaf-Blind Children (HLID) in Salt, Jordan, widely considered the leading institution in the Middle East and North Africa for deaf education and sign language research. Deafness is a topic rarely touched upon in both academia and the public sphere, particularly in the Arab region where there is a dearth of research on disability. Furthermore, what little research has been done sheds light on the host of problems faced by the disabled, especially with regard to education and employment. This ethnography aims to rectify that information gap and is based on fieldwork undertaken at the Institute during the summer of 2014, made possible by a generous grant from the Lisa J. Raines Fellowship, with data collected through participant observation, formal and informal interviews and analysis of cultural artifacts such as school newsletters and information pamphlets. My research revealed that the HLID conceives of its students as capable of being educated, employed and given leadership responsibilities, made manifest primarily in a self-regulatory system where older students are responsible for younger students. This system, while robust and generally effective, was not without criticism. Two other themes that emerged over the course of my research were the centrality of Jordanian Sign Language, which gave students a sense of agency, identity and pride, and the nuanced interreligious relations between Christians and Muslims resulting from the HLID being a Christian school in a Muslim country.

<b>Sarafina Nance, Astrophysics, University of Texas, Class of 2016
Determining the Mass and Stellar Evolution Stage of Betelgeuse</b>

We seek to constrain the mass and evolutionary state of Betelgeuse, a supergiant in the constellation Orion, to determine when it will explode as a supernova. We compile a suite of stellar evolution models (both rotating and non-rotating) of masses ranging from 15M to 25M to extract characteristic frequencies associated with convective regions. Detection of these frequencies could allow us to peer into the star. Extracted frequencies imply that if the rotational velocity equals the observed 5 km/sec, then we would expect to see “noise” at a timescale of several days slightly above the damping frequency. If, on the other hand, the star is in carbon burning, we expect low frequencies at a few days and high frequencies at several hours. We also constrain models with observed values of temperature, radius, luminosity, and rotational velocity. We find it is difficult to match all of the constraints with theoretical models. In particular, matching the observed rotational velocity of 5 km/sec seems to require that Betelgeuse is at the base, rather than the tip, of the red giant branch. This would imply that Betelgeuse is far from explosion, perhaps 100,000 years, but in a very special, brief phase of its evolution. Detection of predicted convective frequencies would help to confirm the evolutionary state.

<h3>Session II</h3>

<b>Sean Kim, Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Class of 2016
Increasing Engineered Cardiac Muscle Tissue Alignment in 2D</b>

Cardiovascular disease is the number one cause of death in most developed countries, yet currently there are no therapies to fully restore cardiac function after a large injury without transplantation. One potential mode of treatment lies in engineering cardiac tissue that can be patched into the site of injury. The contractile part of the heart – myocardium – consists of 2-dimensional laminar sheets of cardiac muscle cells (cardiomyocytes) wrapped around the heart. One of the key factors in developing such engineered cardiac tissue in vitro lies within creating a confluent layer of aligned cardiac muscle cells capable of synchronous contraction, for maximum contractile force. Previous studies in the field have shown that surfaces with extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins micropatterned on them can stimulate cells to form aligned confluent cardiac sheets. However, the degree of cell alignment and the force produced by such engineered tissue can both be significantly increased. Two new patterns were developed; a pattern of 10µm wide lines of fibronectin with 4µm spacing, and a software-generated fiber-like pattern that mimics ECM structure in native chick myocardium. Statistical analysis showed that 10µm x 4µm pattern produced greater cell alignment compared to the 20µm x 20µm (control pattern), while the synthetic biomimetic pattern showed a statistically insignificant difference. The findings of this study show that the alignment of cardiac muscle cells in 2D can be improved by controlling the structure of the ECM protein.

<b>Kiana Murphy, Literature, University of Wisconsin, Class of 2015
Black Women Writing Bildungsroman Stories: Understanding Blackness, Womanhood, and Sex(uality) Through Fantasy, Magic, and Spirituality</b>

To include intersectional identities, the ethnic Bildungsroman genre was developed to acknowledge the reality that little black and brown boys and girls are often barred from "successful" growth or integration into society. Although critics re-constructed the original genre to incorporate marginalized identities, they continued to ignore and invalidate marginalized writers’ roles as writers, creators, and storytellers. This project challenges and works to correct this practice using a mixed methodology that includes historiographical analysis, Black feminist criticism, and literary analysis. By critically analyzing a well-known text, I Know Why The Caged Bird Sings by Maya Angelou, and a work with little formal criticism, Bone Black by bell hooks, this project explores the how of Black women's storytelling. With Angelou’s text more focused on specific themes, scholars have consistently given her novel critical attention. However, since hooks uses a more unconventional approach for the narration of her coming of age story, I argue that this has influenced the lack of critical attention given by scholars for her novel. Although these two texts seem to be vastly different in their approaches to understanding the experiences of Black women growing up, I argue that unconventionality is seen in both and is crucial for their stories of girlhood. By focusing on the metaphysical, occurrences when both novels allude to dreams, fantasies, magic, or the spiritual, this paper proposes an extension of the ethnic Bildungsroman that recognizes unconventional stories like Bone Black, which deserves the critical acclaim as a captivating Bildungsroman of a young Black girl.

<b>Jeffrey Wang, Biophysics, Harvard University, Class of 2015
Modeling Force Generation in Cancerous Mammary Acini: Why Breast Cancer Might be as Much of an Exercise in Physics as in Biology</b>

The rules and mechanical forces governing cell motility and interactions with the extracellular matrix of a tissue is often critical for understanding the mechanisms by which breast cancer is able to spread through the breast tissue and eventually metastasize. Ex vivo experimentation has demonstrated the the formation of long collagen fibers through collagen gels between the cancerous mammary acini responsible for milk production, providing a fiber scaffolding along which cancer cells can disorganize. We present a minimal mechanical model that serves as a potential explanation for the formation of these collagen fibers and the resultant motion. Our working hypothesis is that cancerous cells induce this fiber formation by pulling on the gel and taking advantage of the specific mechanical propreties of collagen. To model this system, we employ a new Eulerian, fixed grid simulation method to model the collagen as a nonlinear viscoelastic material subject to various forces coupled with a multi-agent model to describe individual cancer cells. We find that these phenomena can be explained by a series of relatively simple rules: cells pull collagen radially inwards and move towards the tension gradient of the collagen gel, while being exposed to standard adhesive and collision forces. Despite the overall simplicity of each individual agent, the emergent behavior of many cancerous cells taken as an ensemble can be complex, and we hope that our modeling can lead to future work on the biomechanics behind cancer and other biological functions.

<h3>Session III</h3>

<b>Giuliana Carozza, Economics, University of Notre Dame, Class of 2016
Reading For Life and Adolescent Re-Arrest: Evaluating a Unique Juvenile Diversion Program</b>

Over the past 50 years, diversion programs have proliferated throughout the U.S. as an alternative to traditional system processing for offenders under the age of eighteen. Historically, programs have consisted of a justice component and a service component; however, beyond this, few national standards have been established. Diversion programs have taken the form of boot camps, community service projects, individual, group, and family counseling, case management services, and structured in-home interventions. Despite decades of experience, there is uncertainty in the research, criminal justice, and public safety communities about the most effective practices. We present the results of a rigorous evaluation of Reading for Life (RFL), an innovative diversion program for low-status juvenile offenders in a medium-sized Midwestern county. RFL allows juveniles to study works of literature in small reading groups led by trained volunteer mentors in an attempt to foster social awareness and character development through personal relationships and discussion. Participants (N=450) were randomly assigned to RFL treatment or a comparison program of community service. Using both ordinary least squares and Poisson regression models, we show that RFL generated large and statistically significant drops in future arrests. The program was particularly successful at reducing the chance of future serious offenses (prosecuted offenses fell 62%; prosecuted felonies 84% by OLS estimates) and reducing recidivism for groups with the highest propensity for future offenses. Our research offers insight into effective methods for diversion and a convincing argument for the scaling up of the program, an initiative already begun in surrounding counties.

<b>Heather desJardins-Park, Chemistry, Harvard University, Class of 2015
Designing an iron-based catalyst for enantioselective C-H bond functionalization</b>

Hydrocarbons comprise the bulk of crude oil, and serve as the primary “feedstocks” of the chemical industry. However, due to the strength of carbon-hydrogen (C—H) bonds, hydrocarbons are relatively inert. The ability to chemically functionalize C—H bonds catalytically and on an industrial scale could allow the direct conversion of hydrocarbons into more reactive molecules of increased functionality and value. Previous work has led to the synthesis of an iron-based organometallic complex that can catalyze such reactions. However, this catalyst cannot influence the reactions’ stereochemical outcomes. Being able to exert selectivity over product chirality could have important implications for applications of the catalyst, particularly for biologically relevant uses (e.g., drug synthesis), where stereochemistry is critical. This project aims to design and synthesize an iron-based organometallic catalyst capable of controlling the stereochemistry of the C—H functionalization reaction. We have synthesized a chiral ligand, in an attempt to partially occlude the catalyst’s reactive site and thus influence the substrate’s orientation upon binding to the catalyst. We hope to show that the chiral cleft created by the ligand will influence the stereochemistry of the products formed. By introducing chiral moieties at different locations on the catalyst, we have been able to probe how the catalyst may influence the reaction, and we hope to use this knowledge to tune the catalyst’s enantioselectivity. Ultimately, we hope that this catalyst will see applications in the chemical industry, presenting a novel method to introduce both chirality and reactivity into the simplest chemical “feedstocks.”

<b>Gabrielle Zuniga, Biology, University of Texas, Class of 2015
The Sigma-2 Receptor is a Potential Therapeutic Target of Alzheimer’s Disease</b>

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States, yet the molecular mechanism remains unknown. Many neurodegenerative diseases, including AD, share a common underlying dysfunction in endoplasmic reticular and mitochondrial protein regulation that leads to patterned neurodegeneration and death. Specific to AD, β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide accumulates in senile plaques within the brain due to abnormal processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Here we explored whether a new target, the sigma-2 receptor (Sig2R), can provide a neuroprotective influence in the face of APP dysregulation. In cancer cells, Sig2R has a well-known role in regulating apoptosis but its role in AD remains unstudied. We developed a C. elegans model system with pan-neuronal expression of an extra copy of human APP that displays progressive, age-dependent degeneration of specific cholinergic neurons. We showed that two loss-of-function Sig2R alleles reduce neurodegeneration in AD animals to non-AD control levels. Additionally, GFP-labeled ventral cord neurons accumulated mcherry-tagged human APP in the AD model with wild-type Sig2R. However, a loss-of-function Sig2R allele reduced mcherry signal relative to GFP expression. Next we tested whether pharmacological manipulation of Sig2R could reduce AD-related neurodegeneration. A modular biology oriented synthetic approach was used to synthesize novel sigma receptor ligands to a range of novel, druglike scaffolds. A preliminary screen found one Sig1R/Sig2R ligand that reduced neurodegeneration in a Sig2R-dependent manner. Together, these data demonstrate that Sig2R-targeted ligands can reduce age-dependent neurodegeneration in this model system and suggesting that Sig2R is a viable therapeutic target for AD.

<h3>Session IV</h3>

<b>Rashmi Borah, Bioethics, Ohio State University, Class of 2015
Prophylactic Organ Removal as a Means of Cancer Prevention: A Programmatic Analysis of Ethical Considerations</b>

Prophylactic organ removal refers to the surgical removal of a healthy organ, devoid of any indication of tumor growth at the time of removal, in hopes of preventing the potential onset of tumor growth. Prophylactic organ removal has been used as a treatment option for patients presenting with mutations in the BRCA-1 or BRCA-2 gene. Current literature focused on evaluating the efficacy of the practice has focused almost exclusively on the physiological arguments for or against the practice, with a limited focus on impact of the practice from a non-physiological, patient-centered perspective. This project presents a programmatic analysis of non-physiological ethical considerations relevant to this procedure, in the hopes that these considerations prepare the foundation for a more inclusive risk-benefit analysis. The research methodology focuses on the explication and critical discussion of three particular topics: 1) therapeutic applications of prophylactic organ removal, particularly at the psychological level, 2) a feminist perspective which acknowledges that, with women being the majority of patients undergoing this practice in this context, the impact of this practice on a woman’s conception of herself and society’s conception of femininity is crucial, and 3) whether the traditional arguments describing, supporting, or challenging the working definition of autonomy apply for this procedure, and whether alternate considerations about the execution of autonomy are relevant to this particular procedure. A systematic explication of these three topics and their application to prophylactic organ removal is necessary in determining the ethical status of the procedure on a case-by-case basis.

<b>David Mackanic, Chemistry, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Class of 2015
Analysis of Selective ssDNA Release from Photothermally Active Hollow Gold Nanospheres using Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering</b>

Gene therapy is a rapidly developing DNA-based therapy that promises to provide treatment for oncological and inflammatory diseases. The creation of an effective DNA delivery vector is necessary for effective implementation of gene therapy. The photothermal release of single stranded DNA (ssDNA) from the surface of gold nanoparticles of different shapes and sizes is a promising mode of delivering DNA for gene-therapy applications. Here, we demonstrate the first targeted photothermal release of ssDNA from hollow gold nanospheres (HGNs). The HGNs used demonstrate a tunable localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) while maintaining size consistency. It was shown that HGN 760 and HGN 670 release significant amounts of ssDNA when excited via 785 nm and 640 nm lasers respectively. When excited with a wavelength far from the LSPR of the particles, the ssDNA release is negligible. This study also presents the first use of surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) to analyze the amount of ssDNA released from the surface of gold nanoparticles. As opposed to traditional fluorescence measurements, this SERS based approach provides quantitatively robust data for analysis of ssDNA release and lays a strong foundation for future studies exploiting plasmonically induced ssDNA release. Furthermore, the HGN-based ssDNA system has potential to enable multi-step gene therapy treatments by utilizing different LSPR frequencies that deliver different ssDNA payloads. The DNA system demonstrated here can be applied to in-vitro studies and is expected to successfully release therapeutic DNA for treatment of disease.

<b>Layla Quran, Social Anthropology, University of North Carolina, Class of 2015
Palestinian artists of Israel and the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) Movement</b>

Inspired from the anti-apartheid boycott movement in South Africa, the global Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) movement was launched and endorsed in 2005 by a majority of Palestinian civil society unions, organizations and political parties. The BDS movement has three demands: equal treatment for Palestinian citizens of Israel, an end to the occupation of Gaza, the West bank, and East Jerusalem, and the right of return for all Palestinian refugees. The movement is divided into an academic, economic, and cultural boycott campaign, though my research focuses on the call for the cultural boycott and the reactions of Palestinian artists living in Israel. Just as South African artists participated in the anti-apartheid boycott movement in the 1980s, I am interested in how Palestinian citizens of Israel are responding to the call for the cultural boycott of Israel today. My research question is ‘How do Palestinian artists in Israel respond to the call for a cultural boycott through their art and actions? Palestinians living in Israel, as tax-paying citizens, have the option of receiving funds from the Israeli state or Israeli cultural institutions. They also may collaborate with Israeli artists, and attend concerts by international artists in Israel. The BDS movement has specific guidelines for Palestinian citizens of Israel to follow, and through several interviews, I conclude that although most artists support the goals of the boycott movement, many artists adhere to the cultural boycott guidelines only on a case-by-case basis. Most do not accept funding from the Israeli government if it is conditional, and may work with Israeli artists, but only if the individual they collaborate with speaks for Palestinian rights. There is also still no consensus among Palestinian artists on if international artists, ranging from the Rolling Stones to Madonna, should be allowed to perform in Israel. This research can be used to understand the support and critique of the BDS movement as the main non-violent resistance movement for Palestinians, the interactions Palestinian citizens of Israel have with the Israeli state and other artists, and, the role of the artist in daily politics.
